This assignment contains ﬁve problems (P1-5).  
 
P1. The data contained in eagles.csv are records of salmon pirating attempts by Bald 
Eagles in Washington State. While one eagle feeds, sometimes another will swoop in 
and try to steal the salmon from it. Call the feeding eagle the “victim” and the thief the 
“pirate.” Use the available data to build a binomial GLM of successful pirating attempts.   
 
(a) Fit the following model using MCMC:   
 
yi ∼ Binomial(ni, pi)   
logit(pi) = α + βPPi + βVVi + βAAi   
α ∼ Normal(0, 1.5)   
βP, βV, βA ∼ Normal(0, 0.5)   
 
where y is the number of successful attempts, n is the total number of attempts, P is a 
dummy variable indicating whether the pirate had large body size, V is a dummy 
variable indicating whether the victim had large body size, and ﬁnally A is a dummy 
variable indicating whether or not the pirate was an adult. 
 
(b) Now interpret the estimates. Then plot the posterior predictions.  Compute and 
display both (1) the predicted probability of success and its 95% interval for each row (i)  
in the data, as well as (2) the predicted success count and its 95% interval. What 
different information does each type of posterior prediction provide?   
 
(c) Now try to improve the model. Consider an interaction between the pirate’s size and 
age (immature or adult). Compare this model to the previous one, using WAIC. 
Interpret.  
 
P2. The data contained in salamanders.csv are counts of salamanders from 47 different 
49-m2 plots in northern California. The column SALAMAN is the count in each plot, and 
the columns PCTCOVER and FORESTAGE are percent of ground cover and age of 
trees in the plot, respectively. You will model SALAMAN as a Poisson variable.   
 
(a) Model the relationship between density and percent cover, using a log-link (same as 
in the lecture). Use weakly informative priors of your choosing. Then plot the expected 
counts and their 95% interval against percent cover. In which ways does the model do a 
good job? A bad job?   
 
(b) Can you improve the model by using the other predictor, FORESTAGE? Can you 
explain why FORESTAGE helps or does not help with prediction?   
 
P3. The data in NWOGrants.csv are outcomes for scientiﬁc funding applications for the 
Netherlands Organization for Scientiﬁc Research (NWO) from 2010–2012 (see van der 
Lee and Ellemers  (2015) for data and context). These data have a very similar 
structure to the UCBAdmit data discussed in the lecture. The question is also similar: 
What are the total and indirect causal effects of gender on grant awards? Consider a 
mediation path (a pipe) through discipline. Draw the corresponding DAG and then use 
one or more binomial GLMs to answer the question. What is your causal interpretation?  
 
If NWO’s goal is to equalize rates of funding between men and women, what type of 
intervention would be most effective?   
 
P4. Suppose that the NWO Grants sample has an unobserved confound that inﬂuences 
both choice of discipline and the probability of an award. One example of such a 
confound could be the career stage of each applicant. Suppose that in some disciplines, 
junior scholars apply for most of the grants. In other disciplines, scholars from all career 
stages compete. As a result, career stage inﬂuences discipline as well as the probability 
of being awarded a grant. Add these inﬂuences to your DAG from the previous problem.  
 
What happens now when you condition on discipline? Does it provide an un-
confounded estimate of the direct path from gender to an award? Why or why not? 
Justify your answer with the backdoor criterion.  
 
If you have trouble thinking this though, try simulating fake data, assuming your DAG is 
true. Then analyze it using the model from the previous problem. What do you 
conclude? Is it possible for gender to have a real direct causal inﬂuence but for a 
regression conditioning on both gender and discipline to suggest zero inﬂuence?   
 
P5. The data in Primates301.csv are 301 primate species and associated measures. In 
this problem, you will consider how brain size is associated with social learning. There 
are three parts.   
 
(a) Model the number of observations of social_learning for each species as a function 
of the log brain size. Use a Poisson distribution for the social_learning outcome 
variable. Interpret the resulting posterior.  
 
(b) Some species are studied much more than others. So, the number of reported 
instances of social_learning could be a product of research effort. Use the 
research_effort variable, speciﬁcally its logarithm, as an additional predictor variable. 
Interpret the coefﬁcient for log research_effort. How does this model differ from the 
previous one?  
 
(c) Draw a DAG to represent how you think the variables social_learning, brain, and 
research_effort interact. Justify the DAG with the measured associations in the two 
models above (and any other models you used).  
 
 
